Well, I'm so excited today to have a
world-class metabolic cancer researcher
expert with me today, Dr. Thomas
Seaffid. Um, we're going to be spending
the next hour or so talking about cancer
as a metabolic disease in comparison to
as a genetic disease and other things.
The thinking about cancer has changed
radically in the last 20 years. Dr.
Seaff has been the the cutting edge of
this change. So, after a brief
introduction, we're going to hop into it
and learn um how the thinking about
cancer is changing and um how this
applies to you and can affect you. So um
again I'm excited to thrilled to welcome
Dr. Seaff Freed's a pioneer figure in
the field of cancer research whose work
has profoundly changed our understanding
of the disease. Dr. Seaff Freed is a
professor of biology at Boston College
where he spent decades studying the
intricate mechanisms underlying cancer
and other metabolic diseases. His
academic journey began with a PhD in
genetics and biochemistry from the
University of Illinois Urbana followed
by post-doal research at Yale
University's department of neurology.
Dr. Seafood's landmark book cancers
metabolic disease which I read probably
five years ago and really profoundly
affected how I deal with some of my
patients as I come alongside them with
um treat helping them with their cancers
um was a cornerstone ongoing
re-evaluation of cancer's causes and
treatment. His research challenges the
traditional view of cancer as a genetic
disorder, proposing instead that it's
fundamentally disease of metabolic
dysfunction, specifically the
mitochondria. Um, there we go. Um,
related to mitochondrial damage. This
revolutionary perspective has opened the
door to novel non-toxic therapeutic
approaches such as ketogenic diets and
other metabolic therapies. And so, I'm
really excited to have you today and
kind of dive into um this whole topic.
>> Well, thank you very much, Dr. Hartman.
It's a real pleasure uh to to be here
today and and address some of the issues
and questions you might have. Thank you.
>> Yeah. So, I want to start with a brief
history because I feel like um you know,
if you don't know the past, it's kind of
hard to know where you're at and where
you're going. And so, could you briefly,
you know, as a expert in the field of
this kind of research, give us a
historical overview of the development
and understanding of cancer, maybe going
back to the 1940s and 50s, um today
where we're seeing this massive paradigm
shift.
>> Yeah. Well, it goes back even further.
It goes back to the 1920s.
>> Um the fir the actually I have papers in
19 from 1935
uh by Dr. Lewis who actually identified
some of the key issues uh at that time
on cancer. He he wrote out you know
different it was the paper was on
differences between normal cells and
cancer cells
>> and those differences persist today. the
the issues of what what has transpired
from those earlier times was the uh what
what what explained uh differences.
Okay. And and that's where the theories
come in to uh explain facts. You you
observe things. You observe a phenomenon
and then you try to uh explain it based
on the way you where you observe uh and
and do experiments. And actually uh Otto
Warberg in the 1920s
uh said that from his uh quantitative
biochemical experiments of oxygen
consumption and lactic acid production.
He felt that all cancers regardless of
where they came from uh had a problem in
the way they generated energy which is
ATP adenosine triphosphate which is the
chemical u metabolite of energy in our
body. Without energy we die. Um so how
we get energy is very important and most
of our cells in our body with the
exception of red blood cells get energy
through oxidative phosphorilation and
people say well what is that well
everybody I'm breathing you're breathing
we take in oxygen with our breath and
oxygen accepts electrons in the
mitochondria which is the organel that
generates the majority of our energy in
our cells and the waste every every
breath that I take I'm bringing in
oxygen and every exhale I blow out CO2
and water vapor. Uh CO2 and water vapor
are the end products of the digestion of
the foods that we eat. So let's look at
this way. Everything on the on the
planet is is is derived from some
activity of the sun um photo through
photosynthesis and the sun creates
carbon hydrogen bonds. Um, you know,
when we burn wood, it's I it's an
entropic release of energy. And all
we're doing is breaking the bonds that
was created by the energy of the sun,
and we're releasing back the heat. Well,
we eat food, and that food consists of
carbon hydrogen bonds. If it's a a
sugar, a protein, uh, a fat, or
whatever, they have carbon hydrogen
bonds. And our bodies break those carbon
hydrogen bonds down recapturing the
energy of the sun in our body so that we
can be alive. And most of the energy in
every cell has uh ionic gradients across
the membrane. And that ionic gradient
allows that cell to be alive and perform
its daily functions. Whether it's a
liver cell, a colon cell, a breast cell,
a lung cell, a brain cell, whatever,
skin cell, we're all they're all living
on oxidative energy. Uh, and that's the
way uh most of the cells in our body uh
uh live. What Otto Warberg said, he
discovered that cancer cells in very
different from normal cells, they depend
a lot more on energy without oxygen. And
energy without oxygen is what we call
fermentation, fermentation energy. And
it's called and and you can ident
identify that by the waste product and
they call it lactic acid fermentation
and lactic acid is an end product of the
fermentation. Now what's interesting
lactic acid contains carbon hydrogen
bonds. So it's a wasteful form of
energy. Like let me give you an example.
If you run a sprint real real fast, uh
the muscles generate so much energy so
quickly, it overwhelms the the ability
to to produce energy through oxygen
because the muscle is working so hard
and you end up building up some lactic
acid. The interestingly enough, the
muscle the muscle contains a lot of
sugar in in in the form of glycogen and
it's there evolutionarily
uh because we needed to run away from
the the bear or the lion that was
chasing us. Uh so the m that energy had
to be there in quick uh form otherwise
we would be killed. Um so uh but we
build up lactic acid only but then as
soon as you start breathing the lactic
acid disappears. Warberg noticed that
even in the presence of 100%
uh oxygen pure oxygen. Cancer cells
still produce lactic acid. Uh how is
that possible? What's going on? It's
very very different from normal cells.
So he looked and he said it had to come
from uh some damage to the organel that
generates energy which is the
mitochondrian predominantly. And then he
did some tests by looking at the
consumption of oxygen in slices of
cancer cells and cancer tissues and
noticed in every case the oxygen
consumption in cancer was lower than the
oxygen consumption in normal tissues and
that cancer continued to produce lactic
acid even in the presence of oxygen. So
he said this is a foundational principle
of all cancer cells and uh claimed that
all cancer was some sort of a metabolic
problem uh driven by a fermentation
metabolism.
Then he went on to say how did this
happen? uh and he did some beautiful
experiments because if you take a toxic
drug and stop oxygen uh production stop
uh energy through o uh through
respiration quickly the cell would die
and he would say well obviously we can't
cancer cells cannot arise from a quick
uh sus suspension of oxidative
phosphorilation. So then he said that it
must take some time it it cancer can't
happen overnight. So he said cells that
eventually become disregulated in their
growth which is cancer it has to be a
chronic replacement of oxidative
phosphorilation with this lactic acid
fermentation. So it takes a long time
maybe years for some cells in a human
body to become cancerous because if you
acutely disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation the cell will die and
never become a cancer cell. But if
there's some process by which a cell can
upregulate fermentation over time and
then it loses its growth uh quiescence
and its uh differentiation and then
becomes a cancer um a disregulated
disregulated growth depending dependent
on a fermentation and and he said that
the fuel for the fermentation is
glucose. So, uh, glucose would normally
be fully oxidized in a normal cell with
CO2 and water being produced. But in a
cancer cell, there's something wrong
with that organel and it doesn't get
fully oxidized. But in order for the
cancer to grow, you have to have a lot
of supply of glucose in the m in the
environment to drive life and growth
without oxygen. And and he even
demonstrated this by showing that can
you know if you if you consume cyanide
uh which is a toxic poison everybody
knows and I I I use the the example that
you know the Kool-Aid that Jonestown
that all those poor folks drank Kool-Aid
with cyanide. They're all dead like
quick because they shut down oxidative
phosphorilation. Cancer cells can live
in cyanide. They can live without
oxygen. So clearly Warberg knew there
was some pro fundamental problem in
their ability to generate energy. So
that's where the field stood for many
many years. Warbergs did more and more
experiments and of course he was
attacked and is some of his and I I I
know what what the problem was. Now we
can resolve all of the problems that
Warberg had in his in his hypothesis.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/keto
for cancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rocker Meyer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr.
Thomas Cipher, we will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols.
So, take a look around at school.com/
keto for cancer.
>> It was called the Warberg hypothesis on
the origin of cancer. and uh and
what happened was uh the field realized
that um there were broken chromosomes
and there were mutations. Uh at 1953
when Watson and Crick uh came out with
their structure of DNA and then they uh
they knew that there some cancer cells
had broken chromosomes and DNA
abnormalities. the entire cancer field
like lemmings over the cliff. All ran
off uh chasing genes uh uh and then
threw Warberg under the bus basically
saying that you know that was P. This
metabolism stuff was P. you guys were
never able to really figure out all the
details of the metabolism and we think
the genetic uh problems are are uh the
really the real important issues and uh
the the multi-billion dollar cancer
genome atlas was initiated in the in the
1980s. Uh people winning Nobel prizes
for their work on cancer genes. The
National Cancer Institute says cancer is
a genetic disease consisting of a
hundred different diseases all with
different mutations and we're we're
we're collect now we find millions and
millions of mutations. No two cancer
cells have the same mutation and but we
think that eventually we'll solve this
cancer problem by by analyzing more and
more gene mutations and then and then
developing therapies like precision
medicines uh personalized therapy
targeting mutations and we're going to
solve the cancer problem with
imunotherapies. All of this is is the
result of the shift away from cancer
recognizing it as a metabolic problem to
recognizing it as a genetic problem. So
when the National Cancer Institute
spends six or seven billion dollars of
our taxpayers a year funding uh grants
uh largely tracking down genes or trying
to figure out targeted therapies based
on the somatic mutation theory and the
pharmaceutical industries are constantly
building drugs and we're treating
patients with uh therapies based on the
somatic mutation theory. that is that
cancer is a genetic disease and we're
not and and right now we have over 1,700
people a day dying from cancer. That's
about 70 an hour and they keep throwing
more and more of this of this stuff out.
The reason why we're not dropping the
death rate, the reason why we have all
of these dead people is basically cancer
is not a genetic disease and much of
what we have done uh o over the last 75
uh years has been in the wrong
direction. And when you take away the
fermentable fuels that are driving the
disregulated growth, which is glucose of
course, and now we found the second
major fuel, fermentable fuel. Everybody
knew glutamine was driving this uh beast
as well, but we've shown that it's a
fermentable fuel. So fer fermentation
energy is driving the disregulated
growth. The gene mutations are all
secondary downstream effects. They're
not the they're not the cause uh um of
this problem. So, as long as you keep as
long as you keep targeting effects,
you're not going to drop the death rate
in any significant way. You got to get
to the origin of what's going on, and
that is a metabolic disturbance. Just as
Warberg said, we've cleaned up a lot of
mess. We've we've identified where he
made his mistakes, where he was right,
where he was incorrect. and the
situation now we're we're we're at at a
at a at at a tipping point uh in
realizing that in order to manage cancer
we have to re-evaluate it and consider
it as a metabolic disorder driven by
fermentation and it can't burn fatty
acids or ketones. So the solution to the
cancer problem is simultaneously target
the only two major fuels that can drive
the disregulated growth while
transitioning the whole body off to
fatty acids and ketones which the tumor
cells can't use for energy because
they're very the organel needed to do
that is dysfunctional. So we now know
how to solve or at least at least at
least manage the disease. Uh recognizing
cancer as a metabolic disease is a form
of non-toxic management. If it leads to
that's we don't know that all we know is
that we know how to now manage it
without toxicity and that's what will be
the future.
>> Now you mentioned um two fermentable
foods um glucose and I think you briefly
mentioned glutamine. So those are the
two major molecules that are fermented
metabolically in this process as you
understand is that those are two fuels
you're referring to. There are two metab
right and people know glucose it's sugar
it's basically table sugar is fructose
and glucose and when you take table
sugar in you break it down to these two
molecules one half of which is glucose
and the other half of which is fructose
it's sweet okay so the glucose is fully
oxidized in the mitochondria to produce
CO2 and water in our normal cells but in
the cancer cell it's taken in and
produces large amounts of lactic acid so
but it gets the energy ATP is generated
in the cytoplasm of the cell using using
glucose. Uh uh it's called lactic acid
fermentation with glucose as the as the
predominant fuel. And the other fuel of
course is glutamine. Now glutamine is
very interesting. Uh it's the highest
it's all of us if we do a blood work uh
we find in our blood glutamine is the
most abundant amino acid in our
bloodstream and and it's used for the
health of our gut. It's used
predominantly from for our immune system
uses glutamine and the ura cycle and
it's a very very valuable and important
amino acid. Um what we have discovered
uh that it in cancer cells it's
fermented in the mitochondria. This is
what has confused the field for so long
because they say they always thought
there were only two forms of energy
which was cytoplasmic fermentation in
the glycolysis pathway in the in in the
cytoplasm and the mitochondria oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondria.
working with my uh colleague and friend
Christos Chinopoulos, the world expert
on mitochondria fermentation. He he and
I have shown that glutamine is fermented
in the very organel that should be doing
oxidative phosphorilation. This is the
this is the new thing. So uh a formally
a fuel that was formerly thought to be
oxidized is actually fermented in the
very organel that should be doing
oxidative phosphorilation. So and this
has been a conundrum in the field for
for more a century now 100 years. So um
so we have cleared this up and now we
know that this big second fuel together
with glucose are powerfully synergistic.
They drive all of the met metabolic
necessities for the cancer cell. And and
and once you know that now you know what
the beast eats and now you know how to
kill it. And the problem is nobody's
using this. Nobody even understands
basically what I just said.
>> Yeah. So, I'm going to dive into the the
fasting and the glucose stuff here a
little bit because that's been really
popular in the media between interval
fasting and water fasting and elite
athletes and biohacking and stuff. But
the glutamine thing is a relatively new
concept. Um, h how do you actually
address that? Since you need glutamine
to make glutathione, you need it for
your gut lining, you need it for so many
important things, like how do you
actually um focus on either decreasing
the body's how do you how do you address
that since that's something you you
absolutely need versus glucose you don't
absolutely need?
>> That's why we developed the press pulse
therapeutic strategy for cancer
management. uh which which addresses
exactly what you just asked because we
know how important glutamine is. You
can't go after glutamine like a bull in
a china shop. You're going to hurt the
patient. So you you have to understand
biology and you really have to
understand evolutionary biology and you
have to understand biochemistry and you
have to understand physiology and you
got to put all those disciplines
together to really understand how we how
we strategically uh manage cancer
knowing what the what what that what it
needs to survive. And you're 100% right.
You we can't just go in there and pour
glutamine targeting drugs on a cancer
patient. Uh because first of all, the
cancer will now switch to glucose and
and bypass that. And now you're harming
the gut, you're harming the immune
system, and you're damaging the body by
two being overly aggressive uh on
targeting uh glutamine. So that's why we
developed the pulse strategy.
>> Press pulse. You can press glucose down
to almost non-existence in the body. I I
tell you, man, you can I've seen papers.
It's unbelievable. by the work of Drenic
and others. So, um, listen, when you
push glucose down to really low levels,
yes, you have gluconneogenesis, your
your liver can make some small amount of
glucose when you need it. Who's the hog
taking the glucose from the rest of the
cells? It's the brain. The brain will
take whatever little glucose you might
have. And the muscle, the muscle, when
the muscle, if you, if you exercise, you
deplete glycogen in the muscle. The
muscle will then take glucose out of the
bloodstream and re make glycoage. And
muscle does not share its glucose with
other organs because it's evolution that
we needed to run away from the the beast
that's chasing us, the lion, the tiger
or some other member of our species. So
muscle is not going to say, "Oh, that
you know we have to share." No, no.
Muscle keeps glucose. Brain burns
glucose, but it will also burn ketones.
So if you can elevate ketones, the
brain's need for glucose goes uh down.
But what little it takes the cancer cell
absolutely must have this glucose to
survive. So it's in direct competition
now with organs in the body that
absolutely evolutionarily take take it
away. So the cancer cell now becomes
marginalized. However, even taking away
the glucose that glutamine fermentation
will keep those cancer cells semi semi
semi viable. So you have to now target
the glutamine, but you have to do it in
a way that kills the cancer cells
without harming your gut and your immune
system. So that's why we developed the
pulse. So you you restrict glucose as as
well as you can transition the body over
to fatty acids and ketones. So the
normal cells now switch their energy
from glucose to and normal cells don't
uh accept the immune system don't need
too much glutamine. So now we come in
with the drugs like 60 oxyin or leucine
don beautiful drug
>> and and it will and you put it on for a
short period of time and you take it off
and then you slaughter a large number of
these tumor cells because they can't
switch the glucose because the glucose
is now restricted and you pull it back
and let the immune system come in and
now using the glutamine that we we take
away the glutamine targeting drug immune
system comes in picks up dead corpse
cancer cells are being slaughtered. So,
you can't let the dead bodies hang
around in the organ that's being
targeted or the tumor that's being
targeted. Let the immune system do its
job and clean up the mess. And then they
clean it up and you come back and you
hit them again and you keep that you
keep the the choke hold on the glucose
and you pulse the glutamine and let the
body recover. Kill. Let the body
recover. Kill. Let the body recover and
the next and and the rest of your cells
are getting healthier and healthier
because they're burning the ketone
bodies. So as you slowly degrade the
tumor, the rest of your body is getting
more and more healthy because you're
switching the fuels. And this is what
you got to know. You got to normal cells
are extremely flexible in the fuels they
can use. The cancer cells are massively
inflexible because their oxidative
phosphorilation system is corrupted. So
they have to depend on fermentation. And
the two predominant fuels are glucose
and glutamine. There are other fuels in
there, but they're in tiny amounts and
the cancer cell will go through that
real quick. So then it becomes a battle
for how how how you can continue to
restrict glucose and glutamine
simultaneously with holding one a
constant restriction and the other one a
pulseed restriction and then you can
keep the body healthy while slowly
degrading the tumor. It's unbelievable.
Yeah.
>> I mean, when you when you finally
understand what I'm talking about, the
elegance and the beauty of how we're
going to kill cancer cells without
harming the rest of the body, it's just
really it's really unbelievable. But it
takes a long time for people to
understand this.
>> Well, I think what's interesting about
this concept is that it it's actually
seen in different different spectrums.
For example, like in the biohacking
world, people are doing fasting to
actually um to actually turn over
scinesscent cells, cells that have
become dysfunctional in a proliferative
stage. like doing fasting actually helps
your body. Turn those over. In the
Alzheimer's world with some of the
training I've done with Dr. Dale
Bredensson out of the Buck Institute,
UCLA doing the same concept for
Alzheimer's patients to improve um brain
function. It's kind of interesting
because also in the chronic inflammatory
response world um we've seen that people
with mold or biotoxin illness, their
cells because of mitochondrial
dysfunction get stuck in this
proliferative phase as well where the
cells are being inefficient energy
utilization and even like Dr. Navio's
work with the cell danger response. So
it really sounds like we're hearing
the same story by different experts that
ultimately the mitochondria potentially
are at the root cause of all chronic
diseases. And especially for cancer, we
now have a therapeutic where we can
actually manipulate knowing that
science, starve the cells and then pulse
the glutamine and actually have a
profound impact on people's outcomes.
Would that be a
>> Yeah, I I think you know uh it's a it's
a it's a stage strategy. Um people need
to know uh you know uh what's going on.
We we have found that we can't find any
tumor uh under for years of examining
that that can survive without glucose
and glutamine
>> or can survive on fatty acids or ketone
bodies. So that clearly tells us uh what
the bottom what the what the problem is.
the the the de then you once you
understand the problem then you develop
strategies uh to deal with the with the
problem how how to manage the manage it
that's the key so you can understand
what the needs are of the tumor cell
okay let's develop a therapy based on
that understanding and and and the
evidence that you might know what you're
talking about is when you have these
many uh stage four ter guys that are ter
terminally ill I have terminal cancer.
You know, I'm stage four. Blah blah
blah. All this kind of stuff. And then
you see these folks alive doing well. Um
well, you should have been dead. Why?
Why are you still alive and here? And
many that didn't do this strategy are
dead. And and and the the answer is
that's the evidence that will eventually
be be will what will shift the field is
when you uh demonstrate outcome uh based
on your knowledge of what the problem
is. Um the what we what we see
unfortunately is so many people try to
to do metabolic therapy after they've
been horrifically poisoned and they're
radiated surgically mutilated and
already the they're their cells in their
body are already brutalized. Uh a lot of
these chemotherapies and radiation will
damage mitochondria horrifically. So
you're the very cells you're asking the
normal the normal healthy cells in your
body you're go they don't they don't
have the power uh in many cases because
they have been poisoned. So when when
you when you um uh are identified with
cancer first of all uh and you're and
you're generally fairly healthy other
than you have some problem uh that's the
time when metabolic therapy will have
its greatest advantage. And I'm not
saying that you can't use uh
imunotherapies and radiation and chemo.
Uh they they are tools that could be
effective at the very end at the cleanup
stage. Uh when your body is super
healthy and there might be a few hold
out cells and you could come in with a a
dab of radiation, even a minor surgical
procedure or or even a a toxic chemical,
but it would be used in very low doses.
And the and the surviving tumor cells
are now on on on themselves on death's
door. They have a terminal illness.
They're not surviving. You come in and
you finish them off. What we have is
all, as I keep telling everybody, we
have all the tools in the tool chest to
manage cancer effectively without
toxicity. The problem is people just
just don't know that. And I'm talking
about the in the the establishment is
yet to yet to fully fully understand
this. And if you think cancer is a
genetic disease, hard targeting genes
and hunting for genes, you're you're not
in the right you're at not in the right
zone here, folks. Uh you're not on the
right team. You want to manage cancer,
you got to understand its metabolism and
then go after it that way. Uh and until
that happens, we're we're not going to
get a major drop in death rate as long
as we keep doing things that are down
hurting people and chasing downstream
effects. And and we see it every day,
1,700 people a day. uh uh it comes from
the American Cancer Society cataloges
the dead. They catalog how many people
are dying from all these different
cancers and they're the ones telling us
that it's 1,700 people a day dying from
cancer as 70 an hour which is like
horrific. Well, I think if you also look
at the new treatments as they come out,
the different chemotherapeutics, whether
they're, you know, the metals or
nitrogen based or some of the biologics,
and you look at how much time they add
to people's lives, you look at, you
know, successful medication, 3 months, 6
months, they're not making a person with
a, you know, one month sentence survive
five and 10 years. And so when you look
at these studies, so it's even the
outcomes of those are not impressive. If
this was the you think if this was the
end all beall, then we have a therapy
that multiple therapies that literally
are revolutionary.
revolutionizing how we're treating
cancer and that's not the case. I think
we're still stuck in the genetic
paradigm. You know, I was in medical
school. I was told 90% of all G diseases
were genetic and now we're thinking it's
5%. It's the environment. It's
mitochondrial in deficiency. It's all
this stuff. How do you see that?
>> Yeah. Well, here's the situation.
um the the United States federal
government uh and and their scientific
um um adviserss uh made a decision in in
the 1970s and 80s that we were going to
go full throttle into the into the
genetic uh uh uh underpinning of cancer.
Um, so you were awarding uh research
grants to folks in all the different
medical schools doing cancer research
and and whatever. And um once you
understood uh all of the different kinds
of mutations that you would find in
cancer, we should then be able to
develop targeted therapies, precision
medicine. So we would not have to poison
and irdiate patients because the the
novelty of the outcome of the gene
theory uh would provide us with
precision target uh drugs that would
kill only the cancer cell and not harm
the rest of the body. So the reason why
we're still poisoning and irdiating
people is because the promise of the
gene revolution has not come to pass and
nor will it ever come to pass because
it's the wrong theory. And when you
understand uh uh theories in science,
you you understand uh when you have the
correct theory, outcomes are
dramatically different. Just like the
heliocentric geocentric theory, as soon
as astronomers realized that the earth
was simply another planet uh like the
others revolving around the sun, the sun
was the center of the solar system.
1,800 years of thinking the earth was
the center of the solar system
immediately changed and now we were able
to move forward with with our knowledge
of celestial body movements. uh once we
realize that cancer is a is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease, not a
genetic disease, we will be able to move
forward with therapies that are based on
a a rational understanding of what the
disease actually is and the and the
outcome will be dramatic.
>> Um once people know what to do and how
to do it, be trained. Now we have to
have a retraining program. Physicians,
oncologists, they need to know uh how to
do this. What's what's the what's the
nuts and bolts in the clinic? How do we
where patient comes in? Okay, what what
is the plan? And we already have a big
program underway here that we're writing
that a detailed treatment protocol for
for for achieving this. So, this is
going to happen. It's just going to take
a little bit of time. But you're but
you're absolutely right. I mean, uh the
therapies that we're giving to cancer
patients today are horrific. Um, you
know, it almost goes back to the the
time of the Spanish Inquisition on how
on how they were torturing heretics. I
mean, it's just it's just what we do to
these poor human beings in in these
clinics is just nobody would want to go
down to take any kind of a cancer
therapy just to say, "Oh, I'm going to a
a cancer clinic to get healthy." Are you
kidding me? Uh I mean, if you don't have
cancer and you were to take all these
terrible things, you might die from the
treatments rather than you didn't have
cancer. And a lot of cancer patients,
unfortunately, are dying from the
treatments as much as they're dying from
the the disease itself. This is nuts.
>> Yeah. How are you me as members of our
species treating another member with any
any therapy that has a remote
possibility of killing them? And every
night on the TV you hear all these
katruda optivo. They spend more time
telling you how the drug will kill you
than how it's going to help you. What
how people we don't this is nuts. This
is absolutely nuts. U western diet and
lifestyle. Um our aboriginal ancestors
did not have Dunkin' Donuts on every
corner. uh they did not have uh the
kinds of foods that were eating uh they
didn't they had a lot more exercise. Now
the um Albert Schwitzer the great
humanitarian physician studied these
tribes of people on our planet uh and
looked at cancer was extremely rare in
people who lived according to their
traditional ways. Um, you know, we call
it the paleolithic kind of a don't
forget as as a human, we've been a
species for about one and a half million
years. Most of that time was in a
paleolithic state of fasting and
tremendous exercise. Okay? What killed
those folks uh was was infections and
injuries. Okay? They weren't dying from
cancer and and these kinds of things.
People say, "Well, they didn't live
long." Well, if they even if they live
long, they weren't dying from from
cancer. Cancer. Cancer emerges with our
technology and our our techn food
science and technology has advanced the
uh so much faster than has our biology.
We're still basically physiologically a
paleolithic organism uh driven on eating
anything that walks, crawls, swims, or
flies on the planet and a lot of
exercise. Today, we're sitting in
traffic jams. We're sitting in front of
computers getting all freaked out by
which creating a lot of anxiety,
emotional stress, uh bad food, uh food
that's highly processed. In other words,
we evolved to store energy. That was our
goal because if we didn't store energy
in the form of fat, we would not survive
as a species. So, energy storage became
part of our evolutionary biology. We
have energy. Uh that kind of energy is
every every night on TV, every corner on
the grocery dunk Dunkin Donuts. You can
name it. It's all over the place. We're
getting fat. And that's exactly
evolution in action. People say, "I
don't understand biological evolution."
Well, you understand the obesity
epidemic, right? Oh, yeah. I can just
see all that all over the place. That's
evolution in action. That's our
evolutionary past telling us that we're
in a new environment now. And that
environment is putting us at risk for
cancer, cardiovascular disease,
dementia, all of the different chronic
diseases as the result of our energy
balance changing. Yes. Mitochondria
becoming damaged. Why? Because they're
being overwhelmed by a large amount of
of of fuel uh that's creating reactive
oxygen species and uh this causing a
level of of of dysfunction. And and
you're right, intermittent fasting, uh
these kinds of things brings the body
back into a more energy homeostatic
state, but it's very hard for people to
do water only fasting. Um but you know
now we're realizing it's not if you and
that's why we developed at Boston
College the glucose ketone index
calculator which puts lets people know
quantitatively
whether they're in nutritional ketosis
similar to way our ancestrals uh in the
p ancestors were in the paleolithic
period where injury and infections were
now we listen we have very great
hospitals and we can fix a lot of broken
hips and knees and all this kind of
stuff. Uh and we have a lot of
antibiotics and we have a lot of ways to
manage infections and injury. Uh but our
diet and lifestyle is putting us at risk
for chronic diseases like cancer and
cardiovascular disease and these kinds
of things. So to manage that you have to
keep your mitochondria healthy. And how
you cannot get it's very hard to get
cancer if your mitochondrial
mitochondria remain healthy. How do you
allow mitochondria to remain healthy?
You have to have them burn ketones.
Ketone bodies are fat are breakdown
products of fat. When you mobilize fat,
goes to the liver. Liver makes water
soluble ketone bodies. Our brains burn
ketone body. Our muscle, heart can burn
ketone bodies. Our cells get super
healthy when you're burning ketone
bodies. Cancer cells can't burn ketone
bodies. So yeah, so the whole concept of
managing cancer as a metabolic disease
is bringing the body back into a
paleolithic state and then and then uh
uh starving tumor cells of their
fermentable fuels. And you're absolutely
right. You can manage many different
diseases uh using the same strategy. The
problem is not easy. Okay, let's be
honest. Every night on TV, we're
blistered by by commercials telling us
how good the pizza tastes, how good the
doughnut tastes, you know, all the sweet
drinks. Coca-Cola, you know, Pepsi Cola,
I don't know, you can name go up and
down, name them all. Not that these are
bad in small amounts, they're probably
good and very tasty and all this kind of
stuff. But if you do it all the time,
you get obese, you don't have exercise,
you have a lot of stress, no f all all
this kind of stuff, bad sleep, apnea,
all kinds of stuff. You put yourself at
risk for all these chronic diseases. But
that's prevention. Okay? Most people,
let's be honest, we have an obesity
epidemic. People really were concerned
about what I'm talking about, what
you're talking about. We didn't have
these these kind of that's the that's
the So people say, "Okay, now I have
cancer. What are you going to do for me
now? we're going to poison and irdiate
you or are we going to bring you back
into a new state of health and and
slowly degrade your tumor? That's the
question you have before us now.
>> So, so a couple things you said that I
want to just clarify just for the
audience um because you said a whole
lot. So, you mentioned um um reactive
oxygen species being made which
basically is is a way of saying
inflammation. So if I was to understand
you correctly, inflammation
by by itself, however it occurs, whether
it's high sugar consumption or processed
foods or you know toxic fats, but that
inflammation can lead to this
mitochondrial dysfunction which can lead
to cancer. Correct? So inflammation
things that lead to inflammation whether
it's stress, not sleeping, sleep apnea.
>> So let's look at that inflam is chronic
called chronic inflammation. Uh and you
can measure that by C reactive protein.
Just do blood work. Um, so you people
can when I go to the the physician uh I
don't know once a year, twice a year,
whatever it is. I tell them exactly what
they they should be looking at. I I
don't allow them to tell me. I tell them
I here here are all my feritins. I I
have my vitamin Ds. I have all PSA test
a H1C all all the different things. So I
know how my body is doing on that day
that they took that blood work. And I
monitor those things over time.
triglycerides,
uh, you know, HDL, all all the different
things that one could one could look at.
You put it together and and you look at
and that those blood the blood work
tells you whether or not you're in
metabolic homeostasis. Y
>> So, so, so it's not hard to do. So,
everybody can do this, but you're right.
Chronic inflammation creates damage.
Reactive oxygens, ROS, this is the
reactive annion and the oxygen and this
kind of thing. They are carcinogenic and
mutagenic. So they damage mitochondrial
function and they also cause the
mutations in the nucleus. So so a lot of
the cancer cells uh uh have bad
mitochondria throwing out reactive
oxygen species which are carcinogenic
and mutagenic
causing the chromosomal and genetic
abnormalities that you see in the
nucleus. This is so that's why we know
all the genetic stuff is downstream.
It's the energy metabolism that's the
ultimate cause uh of of disregulated
cell growth. Um so yes chronic
inflammation is one uh viral infections
they have an encogenic viruses like
hepatitis papilloma they've damaged
mitochondria
car uh carcinogen what do you call
something a carcinogen it's a chemical
that causes cancer how does it cause
cancer it actually damages oxidative
phosphorilation creating oxygen radicals
leading to a fermentation metabolism
right sleep apnnea you know intermittent
hypoxia I I noticed that you When I was
going to one of these dental meetings, I
was watching these films of people
sleeping who had sleep apnea. I said,
"Oh my god, this guy hasn't he hasn't
taken a breath in 35 seconds and then
all of a sudden the body, you know, he
he has in Warberg clearly said
intermittent hypoxia damages oxidative
phosphorilation leading to cancer.
>> So, I mean, we see it every day what's
causing it and we just go through the
list. radiation. Uh people, you know,
when when the Fukushima plant over in in
Japan went out, people in Seattle were
digging foxholes or or bomb shelters to
protect them from the radiation coming
from the plant across the ocean. Why?
Oh, because radiation causes cancer.
Why? Because it damages oxidative
phosphorilation leading to disregulated
cell growth. Oh, okay. So, you can put
all this together and you're you're 100%
right. You know, every one of these
things that we've looked at that damages
oxidative phosphorilation chronically
can put someone at risk for
mitochondrial damage, which may present
itself in the form of cancer or some
other chronic uh disorder. Not
complicated.
>> Yeah. I remember reading an article
about this the concept of the genes, you
know, a couple years ago and I was
talking about, you know, a typical
breast cancer, there's up to 80
different genetic mutations. There's
probably 80 different kinds of breast
cancer and we focus on you know BA one
brack 2 her two positive you know her
two negative PR positive all these these
small things but literally just breast
cancer by itself there's probably 80
different genetic plus perturbations of
that and reading that I was like wait a
second so it's that makes me think it's
really not ultimately a primarily
genetic thing for this one disease if 80
different plus mutations are associated
what could be under the hood and sounds
like what you're saying is what's under
the hood is mitochondrial, you know,
electron transport chain uncoupling
resulting, which you haven't used this
phrase yet. I think it was in your book,
um, genetic instability, genetic
instability gives you mutations and over
time, you eventually get one of these
things that makes the cells go
>> grow without control.
>> No, you're you're you're absolutely
right, but it's it's um the it's the ros
reactive oxygen species that are
ultimately causing the genetic
instability and all all the things. But
Warberg said it and we all know there's
two things to get cancer. Number one,
you have to damage oxidative
phosphorilation chronically, not acutely
because the cell will die. Number two,
that cell, listen to this, very
important, that cell must have the
capacity intrinsically to upregulate the
fermentation metabolism because if the
cell cannot replace energy from
oxidative phosphorilation with energy
from fermentation, it won't become a
cancer cell. So there are a couple of
cells in our body where cancer is
extremely rare mainly because they can't
upregulate fermentation chronically and
that's cardiac myioytes. So you rarely
see cancers in cardiac myioytes and
neurons of the brain. The neurons can't
switch uh chronically to fermentation.
They can do it acutely. If you have an
epileptic seizure or you have cardio, if
you have a heart attack where your
everything turns uh it becomes ferment
the whole body fermentss for a short
period of time
>> but it cannot it cannot uh uh readily
adapt to a fermentation.
>> So you have to have but cells that can
gradually upate for upregulate
fermentation chronically like liver,
kidney, bladder, breast like you said.
Yes, there's hundreds of millions of
mutations in breast. Every breast cancer
cell is fermenting regardless of what
its genetic comp composition is. That's
the underlying common pathophysiological
problem of all cancers. Brain, colon,
breast. That's why I'm saying cancer is
one singular type of disease of energy
metabolism. The mutations are all
different, but the underlying problem is
the same. They are fermentors depending
on a fermentation metabolism regardless
of what their genetic composition is. So
we know that now when you switch from
efficient oxidative phosphorilation to
inefficient oxidative phosphorilation
you have to change the parameters of the
cell. So this is ankco genes. People
love to talk about ankco genes um that
like hif alpha mick and these different
kinds of terminologies they use for
these. These are facilitators
of opening the floodgates on the cell to
get in the fermentable fuels. Because if
you're switching from one from an from
an efficient system to an inefficient
system, you have to have a large a large
stockpile of fuel to make up for the for
the efficiency. Now you're inefficient.
So floodgates for glucose and glutamine
open up on the surface of the cell to
bring in these two fuels. Glutamine is
already the most abundant fuel in our
body and the glucose is is already in
our diet. So the glucose from the diet
and the glutamine from the blood pouring
in driven ankco genes opening up the the
transporters on the surface of the cell
and uh the exhaust system. So they blow
out lactic acid and suinic acid as waste
products and we see that and that's why
we know all the cancer cells are
fermenting on glucose and glutamine
because they're all blowing out lactic
acid and suinic acid. Clear clear as as
as as the day. you know, it's just so
clear what these cancer cells are doing
and uh and how they're living.
>> So, two quick questions in regards to
that. Um, first question is I'm I'm
really big into fatty acids. Part of
what I do with people with mitochondrial
issues and neurological issues is is
work on reeregulating their fatty acid
synthesis. Um,
but our dietary, our food system is
filled mainly with processed rancid
fatty acids, longchain fatty acids,
trans fats.
in your understanding because it makes
sense to me but I'm just kind of curious
in your understanding. Does it make
sense if we're consuming these
dysfunctional lipids that make up the
cell membranes of the mitochondria and
affect the mitochondrial function that
these that the are the infiltration of
our dietary system with these
dysfunctional fats could be a precursor
for reactive oxygen specy increasing and
ultimately lead to an increased risk for
cancer. Does that make metabolic sense?
>> It could it it could do that. Um, again,
you know, most cancer cells synthesize
their own fatty acids and most of them
are saturated fatty acids.
>> Um, they they they use glucose. We've
tested all we published a couple of big
papers on this.
>> I mean, the glucose carbons make the the
cancer cells make a lot a lot of fat.
They they synthesize their own fat. Um,
so they they make that they can Yeah.
Yeah. You can take it up from the
environment. But the bottom line is in
order to grow in order to grow you have
to synthesize fatty acids, proteins and
nucleic acids. Um this is these are the
the building blocks of of of of cells.
You have fatty acids in the membranes.
You have proteins which are amino acids.
So you need carbon and nitrogen to build
all these things, right? To for a cancer
cell to grow, you have to it it
synthesizes. Now, what it can't
synthesize, it also sucks up stuff from
the micro environment. So, bad fatty
acids from the diet uh could in fact uh
contribute uh they're not contributing
to energy, but they could damage further
the mitochondria for sure. So, but the
cancer cell is also synthesizing a
tremendous amount of these things from
its own ability to synthesize as long as
it has the energy. Energy number one and
metabolites number two. So glucose and
glutamine provide both the energy and
the metabolites uh for these cancer
cells to continue to grow uh out of
control. So and that's why I said you if
you take away the two fuels dep giving
them both energy and metabolites
they ain't going to grow very well. So
um so that's the strategy and yeah I I I
think that you know the consumption of
of uh provocative fatty acids and other
other things as well um that could
damage oxidative phosphorilation may
contribute uh to the gradual degradation
of the ability of the cell to generate
efficient energy through oxidative
phosphorilation. It's a little bit more
complicated. Um, and there's a lot of
factors that I'm not going to address,
but but uh it's it's you know, our goal
is to we got a person with a stage with
a cancer. Let's get rid of it. Uh, and
how do we do that? And we can do that.
That then after we do that, I think
we'll we can start focusing on all other
issues that may not be as acutely
important as keeping somebody alive.
>> Yeah. And just a quick another side of
question real quick from what you said,
can you use LDH, lactate dehydrogenase
as a surrogate marker for lactic acid um
increased production of lactic acid?
>> Um depends if whether it's whether it's
LDHA or LDHB. Uh LDHA brings brings in
ketone bodies uh and lactate into cells.
Um uh I'm sorry, LDHB. LDHA is the
exhaust. So when you create a tremendous
amount of lactic acid in in in the cell,
LDHA, there's actually five different
forms of lactic acid dehydrogenase, but
it's LDHA is the is the one that's
upregulated massively. So it's part of
the it's it's in run by Hif1 alpha, the
ankco gene. So, so uh what happens when
oxygen is deprived uh glycolysis is
upregulated tremendously and uh lactic
acid is dumped out and and you have to
upregulate the activity of LDHA lactic
acid dehydrogenase A. So most aggressive
cancers have very high LDHA
uh and that's controlled by Hif one
alpha a transcription factor uh which is
one of the ankco genes that we talked
about. So yeah, most cancers but you
know people there's a lot of work going
out. Oh let's target let's target LDHA.
Why target LDHA? Just have to pull the
plug on the glucose. If the glucose goes
down it d
the glycolic the glycolytic pathway is
is downregulated and the amount of
lactic acid coming out is downrated and
the cell can't get energy and dies. So
um uh this this is why it's so so
incredibly simple uh to do this. People
are always wondering something. They
always want to go to some level of
complexity. You don't have to go to just
to make it look like they know what
they're talking about. You know, the the
idea here is are we're going to kill
cancer cells and we want to do it easy
and we want to do it quickly. You got to
pull the plug on their fuels and
transition to something they can't use.
All other issues become secondary.
>> Gotcha. Let's make a slight transition
from the science because I feel like we
could talk about the science for like
you know hours. The practicality because
ultimately people you know either want
to prevent cancer. I mean, you know, one
in two people in our country getting
cancer is a crazy number or they know
someone who's had cancer. So, um, I
guess my first question with this little
transition is, you know, how are, you
know, first of all, with your research,
what kind of outcomes have you seen? You
know, because, you know, you hear about
people going to clinics in Mexico or
over I had a patient go to Germany. It
sounds like you're doing research up in
Boston. What kind of could you give us
some examples of patients in your
research and what kind of research is
going on using this modality as a um way
to come alongside and help people with
um a diagnosis of cancer?
>> Yeah. Well, we publish papers on it and
we describe what we've done. Um and of
course they're singular cases. Um we're
not running clinical trials only because
people don't know how to do this and
nobody wants to support it anyway. Uh
but so you take individuals and we have
a lung cancer patient from Greece uh who
went on a keto a keto Mediterranean diet
got into a lower GKI uh with a a lung
cancer that metastasized to his brain.
We published a paper in the German curus
um and uh people can read the details of
what was done by my good physician
colleague Athanas even Julio and his
staff in Greece and then we had one out
of Turkey advanced breast cancer that
metastasized to the brain. uh the person
was lit up like a Christmas tree on PET
scan and and we used a combination of
keto metabolic therapy with reduced
chemotherapy. Uh so we were able to get
very good outcome from that person.
She's still alive. They were these are
stage four cancer patients that weren't
expected to live. And of course there's
Pablo Kelly with the brand glyopblasto
who's out now 10 years um and he's
alive. We published the paper exactly
what we did. We have five years of his
dietary uh glucose ketone metabolites in
the blood and we published that in the
journal Frontiers in Nutrition. Um we
did one on a dog. Uh actually that's our
only thing we ever cured was the dog had
a mass cell on his face. We uh the other
guys are still alive. So I don't know if
they if they're going to be cured or
not. All I know is they're living a hell
of a lot longer than they were. Now, uh,
Brad and Maggie Jones are doing a big
documentary and they are, uh, forming a
registry and interviewing all the the
folks that were stage four, uh, terminal
cancer patients that are still alive,
>> uh, and everyone telling their story of
what they did. So, so they're not
published case because the field doesn't
believe in all this stuff, right? Oh,
they don't want they don't want it.
Listen, if you had a drug, any drug that
would do what metabolic therapy could
do, oh, there'd be a stampede for it.
Like like to there would be no tomorrow.
Oh, no. It comes from a diet uh kind of
a manipulation using uh off off patented
drugs. Yeah.
>> You know, Elchipo drugs that are used,
you know, oh no, we can't have that.
That doesn't work. But a drug, any kind
of a new patented drug which would do
metabolic therapy would, oh, they'd say
this is the greatest thing. This would
be unbelievable.
>> But it's not happening. So, so what you
have to do is you have to see the people
and I I publish case reports and then
they say, "Oh, NF1. Oh, we can't believe
it's just an NF1. If I had a drug that
did what that N of one did, oh, they
would be all over it because it wasn't a
patentable drug or a patentable
strategy. They don't want to know about
it." But yet, look at the data. Look at
the individual who's alive. How does he
feel? You know, what's his quality of
life? That's the key thing. And and like
you said at the beginning, we had they
did a big study on the 92 drugs
developed from the from the sematic
mutation theory and and they they they
only improved overall survival by two
and a half months uh spending billions
and billions of dollars and the and the
offtarget effects of these drugs were
horrific and some of the drugs cause
hyper progressive disease where the drug
will kill you faster than the cancer.
metabolic. We have not ever seen a
situation where metabolic therapy
accelerated the growth of a tumor and
killed a patient uh fa faster uh than
than the tumor would. Never happens.
Okay? But it happens significantly in
these new cancer drugs.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Ciphford on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rockermeer, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereed's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker has already made at
www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just investing in your own
knowledge, you're also contributing to
the future of cancer research. Help us
make a difference. Together, we can
drive change and save lives.
And how many people have come through
that you and just with you alone that
you worked with, how many patients have
you have come through and worked with
the physicians you've trained or whatnot
or your experience with that?
>> Well, it's a it's a work in progress.
Uh, a lot of it is um doing things on
the on the go. And don't forget when
when we treat I don't I'm not a
physician. I can't treat anybody
>> but but but I write the protocols by and
my colleagues and I write the treatment
protocols by which phys which patients
should be treated by licensed
practitioners
>> and we're seeing we we we when a patient
oh we think we're doing too much of this
pull it off it it it everybody is a
different metabolic entity you can't
have one shoe fit all every you got a
gender differences you got age
differences you got body weight
differences you got all kinds of
differenc to say you have to work with
each patient as a separate entity. Know
what they can and cannot uh deal with
and you bring them and use the blood
work as your as your non-invasive
imaging and blood work tell you whether
you're moving in the right direction and
most importantly how do you feel? It's a
very simple question. Ask the cancer
patient how do you feel? Oh, I spent all
day on the toilet. I'm vomiting. No, you
don't feel good. Okay, right away I'm
telling you this is this what you
shouldn't you shouldn't have to be doing
any of that, you know. But if the guy
says, "Oh, geez, I feel like a million
bucks. I never felt better and my cancer
is getting Okay, that tells you're on
you're on the right path." So, what I'm
hearing you say is that um that you're
individualizing the metabolic strategy
per the person, not giving them a
protocol for their diagnosis that you
just replicate for 100 to 200 people,
but you're actually individualizing
based on the patients how they feel,
response, metabolic markers, and they're
getting actually a personalized
intervention plan.
>> Yes. Personalized nutrition, drug diet.
It's personalized. It absolutely is.
That's that's a novel concept.
>> Yeah. Right. But it's you know that's
what every every member of every
physician should want to do that. That's
what we call practicing the art as they
say up here in Boston.
>> Practicing the art.
It makes the guy feel good because then
he becomes he's not following some
scripted standard of care. He's
following his own intuition with markers
that are telling him and the patient's
telling him. So, it's a very feed
forward feedback between the between the
physician and the patient and together
they work as a team. And metabolic
therapy puts a lot of burden on the
shoulders of the patient. You the
patient's going to have to be an active
participant in their healing process.
They're not going to just sit there like
some bystander and be nuked and
poisoned. They actually have to play a
major role. So this idea of battling
your cancer when you do metabolic
therapy you are absolutely battling your
cancer because you are understanding
what you're doing and why you're doing
what you're doing.
>> Yeah. Now I think one thing as well to
just go back to what you said before I I
have a clinical research company. I've
been a principal investigator for over
70 clinical trials and um I just think
people don't really realize like how
clinical research works um where you
have to have one outcome. You limit the
change. You can't change things based on
patients symptoms. If people aren't
compliant, they get kicked out, you
know, of the studies. So, why don't you
touch up briefly touch about the actual
process of doing clinical research? I
think a lot of people just don't realize
when they say something has to be double
blind, placeboc controlled, you know,
standard of care. It really eliminates
the majority of patients. When I when we
were intake patients through our
clinical trials, most people would even
get in because they were too overweight
or the sugar number, their A1C was too
high or they couldn't be compliant or
enough. And so we almost create this
false population of patients in clinical
trials to get outcomes on a singular
intervention and that's not really quite
how the real world works. So I'd be
curious if you could just like dive into
that concept.
>> Yeah. Well, I think that that was put in
there uh as a strategy to to eliminate
any other uh opportunities that uh might
be effective. double blind crossover a
singular approach uh eliminates
metabolic therapy as being uh a strategy
for doing the the traditional standard
uh trials clinical trial. Well, where's
the clinical trial? Well, the our kind
of clinical trial is based on how long
we can keep pay people alive, right?
And you have you have we have in in
glyobblasto and many other cancers, we
have what we call historic controls. All
right? We know that person with a
glyopblasto uh the probability of
surviving to five years is is about one
or two percent. You know it's very very
low. Um and we can see how beautifully
the the survival curves are overlapped
all over the world. I went through and
looked at all the survival curves and
they're all almost they they almost
copied and that's because they all
irdiate and poison the patients the same
way. It's almost like, wow, you're
you're taking away any minimal any
possible advantage that poor patient
would have. You took it away because
when you irdiate the brain, you free up
massive amounts of glutamine and and
then you give highdose steroids, uh,
sugar and glutamine and then you wonder
why your patients are dying.
>> Yeah.
>> It's just like nuts. So, so you do sto
you do historic controls and you look at
each person. If I what's the probability
of me keeping that guy alive? Well,
really low if you do standard of care.
What if I have 50% of the people that I
did metabolic therapy on who made five
years? Oh my god, that's unbelievable.
What are you doing? Well, let me tell
you what we're doing. Here's the way we
do it. Okay, then things begin to change
because bottom line, people want to
live.
>> Yeah,
>> they want to be lived. And if and I'm
telling you another thing, these they're
dragging these poor cancer patients into
these clinical trials day and day. Oh,
we got a new clinical trial. Those pa
number one patients should ask how is
that clinical trial going to target
simultaneously my glucose and glutamine
and how is it going to make the rest of
the cells in my body healthy if they
don't have an answer for that I wouldn't
do that trial
>> well I think it's interesting because
glyobblastoma multififor which is like
almost one of the most horrendous tumors
to get diagnosed with brain cancer um
it's almost uniformly lethal yet as far
as like this whole metabolic thing the
literature on that goes back 50 60 years
I think it's one of the first cancers if
Correct. They actually used ketogenic
metabolic like diets to actually treat
with patients having these. If you make
it five years without cancer, that's
unheard of.
>> The first one was Linda Neblings
actually was 1995
uh before it went there might have been
unpublished case reports, but Linda
published 1995.
>> Yeah, I feel like I read something from
before that which it probably was
unpublished, but was in a book of
talking about GO. It was also using
ketogenic diets for kids with seizure
disorders. I think I was back in the 20s
and 30s.
>> So this concept of using your metabolism
to treat untreatable things
>> is actually not old.
>> It's not it's not it's not new. It's
it's quite an old
>> Yeah. Wilder at the Mayo Clinic in 1921
used the ketogenic diet first to manage
epilept that's how I worked in the field
of epilepsy at Yale University and all
these that's how I got into it. Um
working on managing epileptic seizures
using metabolic therapy. Um and then we
jumped into the cancer thing based on
what Linda Nebling had and out of
Werberg were showing. But but the bottom
line is that yeah but uh while he knew
that he would water only fast the canc
the the epilepsy patients and get
tremendous success but you can only do
that for so long before the patient dies
from starvation. So he developed the
ketogenic diet which blocked epileptic
seizures. And then they threw epileps uh
they threw ketogenic diet for epilepsy
under the bus in the mid in 1930s when
they developed these chemicals that
could stop epileptic seizures. Then it
was Jim Abrams, the movie producer,
produced the movies Airplane and those
kinds uh when his son Charlie uh
developed intractable seizures and he
found um John Freeman at at Johns
Hopkins University and and Millie and
they developed a keto and kept Charlie
alive and Jim Jim said, "What the hell
is going on?" He got Meryill Streep to
do the first do no harm movie and then
all of a sudden ketogenic diets for
epilepsy started to explode all over
again and then I came in uh with the
with the cancer uh part of this whole
thing and uh because nobody had been
talking about managing cancer using
metabolic therapy ex the Warberg had it
designed nobody was switching to
metabolic therapies for managing cancer
that's what we started we we started all
that so which is actually going to be
the future clinical that's actually
going to be the future standard of care.
It's just a matter of time. Um, so we're
we're seeing how science and clinical
practice and outcomes have all over
overlapped at one point or another
during during the past and we're
starting to now uh develop therapies
based on on these understandings.
>> So one one thing you mentioned before is
like a retraining for physicians and you
mentioned putting protocols together. So
if someone you know I see a lot of
patients that come I I come alongside in
their cancer journey um they want
different options they want integrative
choices whatever that term means um like
if if a practitioner wanted to try or
try to refer a patient how's that work
if someone's actually like they want to
try something different than
chemotherapy radiation they want to try
an integrative how does that work for an
actual patient or provider a doctor if
they wanted to provide this option for
their patients
>> well this is a real tricky slippery
slippery slope as they say because if
you start practicing treatments that are
not
>> um dictated by the standard of care, you
could be reprimanded or lose your your
license. And a lot of physicians fear
that. Uh they do what they do because
they're required to do that. And um and
when they say, geez, you know, I know
metabolic therapy will help my patients
so much. Can I do that? No. And they'll
say, why? Because there's no clinical
trial. Well, the clinical trials are
designed not to not to ever have you do
that. So I it's it's a very uh it's a
very paralytic kind of a thing. But
occasionally we find physicians. Now, I
just understand that uh Arizona uh had
passed a right to try uh u type two um
where where we're beginning to see some
states are starting to open up a little
bit more where physicians will not will
will have will have will be able to
practice uh some of these approaches uh
without being reprimanded uh in such a
way. And I and I think that uh once we
can get uh these kinds of things off the
ground uh and show published clinical
evidence, which I do uh that this stuff
works, we're treat we have a a paper uh
in review right now, a very
comprehensive treatment protocol for
glyobblasto. In other words, an actual
how to do this. Uh and when this
happens, you do this and when that
happens, you switch to this. um and and
always be aware of everything that could
possibly go wrong and what how to
address it. So it's a a very
comprehensive treatment manual protocol
for the physician and you know once once
that would get out published there
there's your your tool then you go and
treat the patients you collect the data
and you publish the case report you
publish the outcome um for glyopblasto
and it's you can tweak it for any cancer
to be honest with you because they're
all the same they all need fermentation
you target fermentation so this is going
to happen the problem is we have so many
uh obstacles in the way uh to prevent us
from doing
uh these rigid standards of care uh
superficial statements well I don't
believe that what the hell then what
what's what part of the science what
number do you not believe you know uh
which pathway are you not familiar with
um so you don't you have all of these
superficial reasons why you can't do
what you're supposed to do uh but it all
break down because you know why people
want to live
>> that's that's your motivation people
>> yeah I remind people when they ask about
you know you know it's not standard of
care there's what's the evidence I I
just remind people that you know um
vitamin D per Medicare vitamin D testing
for screening is still considered
experimental or controversial and
screening for an A1C for patients for
pre-diabetes by Medicare is still
considered experimental and so if
something that as as basic as vitamin D
and A1C is still considered experimental
by one of the biggest covers in the in
the country then obviously anything more
complex than that is going to even more
controversial.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, the bottom line
here is if you don't take vitamin D,
you're not going to be dead in six
months. You know, um you can live. You
can just walk out in the sunshine. Uh
you know, diabetes isn't going to kill
you. You got diabetes today and oh,
you're terminal now. No, no. When you
have cancer, man, it's altogether
different. You're you're dealing with a
different beast here. It puts the fear
of God into the soul when you're told
that you have cancer. You want to live
and you want to go you want to do what's
going to keep you alive. And if there's
something out there that's that's
legitimate and based on hard science and
it becomes scientific. One of the things
I do here at Boston College teaching
biology is called scientific literacy.
We have to become scientifically
literate. We are responsible for the
existence of our soul on this planet.
And and when it comes to these kinds of
things, you can learn. I I wish my
students when I teach the kids in the
class, oh, you know, this get they're
going to get a grade on this stuff. But
I'll tell you, when you have a cancer
patient that needs to know this, you
become, you'd be surprised how smart
they become in a very short period of
time.
>> I wish my students could become this
smart. It's the motivation. You know
why? Because his life is on the line. He
wants to better he better understand
scientific literacy real quick. And the
other thing, too, is we don't we don't
deny anyone who would like to take a
toxic poison or be surgically mutilated
or irdiated. We're not stopping any of
these folks from wanting to do that. You
know, that's their choice. Uh, and some
people say, "Listen, I'm I'm sorry. I
love Hershey bars. Uh, I love I I love
Chalupas and Big Macs and and and soft
drinks, and I I I'm sorry. I I prefer
radiation and chemo." I say, "Fine." I
mean, that's not my It's not my problem.
That's your problem.
So, Dr. S, um, this is a great
conversation. I've loved it. We could go
on for for quite some time. Um, I
probably recommend as a practitioners
that follow me as well. I'd recommend
for practitioners if they want to learn
more to read your book a Melbach
approach to cancer which I feel like is
the tome that actually dives into this
but for everybody else out there if they
want to learn more about what you're
doing or this these concepts if they're
still not you know they're curious about
what what recommendation would you have
or even follow what you're doing would
you have any recommendations for those
individuals
>> well well yeah because I we published
most of the stuff I've mentioned with
you today in this conversation is on
open access publications so everybody
can read it and don't forget there are
case reports reports are all open
access. Even the dog report is open
access.
>> Yeah.
>> So, just put my name Thomas Seaff Freed.
What did he publish?
>> Okay. And you'll see publications and
then you can read open access. If you
have uh Google, you're on the internet,
you have you can get it.
>> And don't forget all of our research
currently is supported by philanthropy
and private foundations. So, if people
if people want to, you know, it's
unbelievable. There are folks on this
planet who just want to be part of the
paradigm change. They want to feel good
that they're going to do something for
mankind and and they and they throw us
some money into Travis Christopherson's
foundation and and to Boston College
Cancer Fund so people can donate
directly to our research through the
university Boston College or through
Travis Christopherson's foundation and
some other small foundations that
support our work. So, so and the longer
we we don't don't forget we do
everything preclinally.
We have model systems that tell us what
works and what doesn't work. And I
immediately share that information with
the clin my clinical colleagues who then
start to tr to test it on the patients
and and then feed forward feedback. We
develop uh doses timing and scheduling
and then s and our goal is to keep
animals mice alive for as long as
possible just like we do in the clinic.
The bottom line is how long you can keep
take keep a terminal subject alive far
longer than would be predicted. And boy,
humans do so much better than these poor
mice, you know. Oh my god, humans are
the ultimate uh example of success if
you really want to to to know it. So So
that's what keeps us going. And yeah,
we're publishing. I got a couple of big
ones right on the we have a couple of
coming down the pike here that are going
to shake the shake the the foundations
of the entire establishment uh where
they're in the works right now uh
treatment protocols new information on
the scient the science behind what I'm
saying you know tough papers written so
uh uh uh observation diet drug
combinations that are really spectacular
so so all this stuff is going to come
down and it eventually it will filter
into clinical practice and ultim
Ultimately, it's you're going to see
people walking the planet for a lot far
longer than they ever imagined.